# Modelling fan effects

Models of fan effects.

The files test whether skipgram models can predict fan effects for simple fan experiments (as in Experiment 1 in the paper) and for fan effects based on similarity (Experiment 2).

## Python files

- skipgram.py: skipgram model in pytorch
- skipgram_fan.py: code to model Anderson-style fan experiment (Experiment 1 in the paper); it assumes no pretrained data, training is done just on the experiment; the main output is activation for each fan (mean and standard deviations) of to the skipgram model (per epoch).
- skipgram_similarityfan.py: code to model the fan similarity experiment (Experiment 2 in the paper); it uses pretrained embeddings for words, and learns context word embeddings to pass the fan experiment; the context word embeddings are initialized randomly; it then measures the difference in activation between fan2 and fan4 for 50 files (identical to the ones used in the experiment) manipulating location fan and 50 files (identical to the ones used in the experiment) manipulating person fan.
- skipgram_similarityfan_discrete.py: code to model the fan similarity experiment; it uses pretrained embeddings for words, but discretizes them using the sign(-1, +1); then, it applies the standard ACT-R spreading activation formula, treating each dimension in a vector as one cue.

## Folders

### csv_files

These are outputs of the Python files plus one file with the experimental stimuli.

- basic_fan.csv: the output of skipgram_fan.py, activations for fan 2 and fan 4
- similarityfan_loc.csv: the csv output of skipgram_similarityfan.py for location fan stimuli
- similarityfan_pers.csv: the csv output of skipgram_similarityfan.py for person fan stimuli
- dotproducts_perword.csv: the csv output of skipgram_similarityfan.py for individual dot products per word pairs. Only one word in a pair is shown, the location word when the location fan is manipulated, or the person word when the person fan is manipulated. The dot product is calculated combining location/person word with the right target.
- discrete_similarityfan_loc.csv: the csv output of skipgram_similarityfan_discrete.py for location fan stimuli
- discrete_similarityfan_pers.csv: the csv output of skipgram_similarityfa_discreten.py for person fan stimuli
- actr_activations_perword.csv: the csv output of skipgram_similarityfan_discrete.py, providing ACT-R activations for individual words.
- online_testing_all.csv in the folder csv\_files: stimuli for the similarity fan experiment

### extracting_attributes

A separate set of files allowing to extract binary attrbitues in a more sophisticated way, following Korchinski et al. Since the results were very similar to just using sign function for binarization, we stick to the simple method in the paper. See the readme file in that folder for more details.

### figures

The file with various figures generated by the R analysis.

### R_analysis

R files to create Bayesian models.

## Re-run the modeling experiments

To model activations in experiment 1, run:

python skipgram_fan.py 

To model activations in experiment 2, run:

python skipgram_similarityfan.py

To model activations in experiment 2 but with discrete (0/1 values only), run:

python skipgram_similarityfan_discrete.py

For Experiment 2, you will also have to download the vector-space model, which is available in this repository:

https://vectors.nlpl.eu/repository/

Select the Dutch word2vec model.
